A Story of Trystan, How He Went With Esyllt, the Wife of March y Meirchion
Ystori Trystan y modd ir aeth ag Esyllt gwraig March y Mheirchion.
Manuscript 43. Cardiff
Transl. Tom Peete Cross



In the interim Trystan ap Tallwch and Esyllt, the wife of March y Meirchion, fled into the forest of Clyddon (Kelyddon), Grolwg Hafddydd (Summer Day Aspect), her handmaiden, and Back Bychan (Little Small), his page, carrying pasties and wine with them. A couch of leaves was made for them.

And then March y Meirchion went to complain to Arthur against Trystan, and to entreat him to avenge upon Trystan the insult offered him, because he was nearer of kindred to him (Arthur) than Trystan was, for March y Meirchion was first cousin to Arthur and Trystan was but the nephew-son of a first cousin to Arthur. "I will go, I and my family *1," said Arthur, "to seek either satisfaction or bloodshed ( ?)" And then they surrounded the wood of Kelyddon.

One of the peculiarities of Trystan was that whoever drew blood upon him died, and whoever Trystan drew blood upon died also.

When Esyllt heard the talking around the wood, she trembled against the two hands of Trystan. And then Trystan asked her why she trembled, and she said it was because of fear for him. Then Trystan sang this englyn:


"Fair Esyllt, be not fearful ;
while I am protecting thee,
three hundred knights will not succeed
in carrying thee off,
nor three hundred armed men."

And then Trystan rose up and hastily took his sword in his hand, and approached the first battalion as quickly as he could until he met March y Meirchion. And then March y Meirchion said, "I will kill myself in order to kill him." And then the other men all said, "Shame upon us if we interfere with him." Thereupon Trystan went through the three battalions uninjured.

Kae Hir (K. the Long) was in love with Golwg Hafddydd. Thus he did: he [went to] the place where Esyllt was and spoke, singing this englyn :


"Blessed Esyllt, loving sea-gull,
Speaking in conversation, [I say that]
Trystan has escaped."
Esyllt :
"Blessed Kae, if it is true what thou sayest,
in conversation with me,
thou wilt obtain a precious (lit. golden) mistress."
Kae :
"A golden mistress I desire not
because of what I have said *** ( ?)
Golwg Hafddydd I seek."
Esyllt :
" If it is true the tale
thou hast just told me with thy mouth,
Golwg Hafddydd will be thine."

And then March y Meirchion went a second time to Arthur and lamented to him because he obtained neither satisfaction nor blood for his wife. And Arthur said, "I know no counsel to give thee except to send instrumental musicians to sound toward him from afar, and after that to send vocal musicians with englynion (epigrams) of praise." So they did. Thereupon Trystan called to him the artists and gave them handfuls of gold and silver. After that some one was sent to him concerning peace; namely, Gwalchmai. And Gwalchmai sang this englyn:


"Heavy is the immense wave
when the sea is at the centre [of its course ;]
who art thou, impetuous warrior ?"

Trystan:
"Heavy are the wave and the thunder (together),
though their separation be unwieldy ( ?) ;
in the day of battle I am Trystan."

Gwalchmai :
"Trystan of irreprovable qualities,
I find no fault with thy discourse ;
Gwalchmai was thy companion."

Trystan :
"I should perform for Gwalchmai, on the day
he should have on hand the bloody work,
what brother would not do for brother."

Gwalchmai :
"Trystan, noble (lit. bright) chieftain,
Heavy [the blows] thy effort has struck (lit. threshed) ( ?) ;
I am Gwalchmai, nephew of Arthur."

Trystan:
"Quicker than an instant, Gwalchmai (?),
if thou shouldst have on hand the work of combat,
I would make gore up to the two knees (blood knee-deep?)."

Gwalchmai :
"Trystan of perfect qualities,
if Archgrwn did not refuse [service,]
I would do the best I could."

Trystan :
"I ask in order to pacify,
I ask not out of asperity;
what is the number which is before [me] ?"

Gwalchmai :
"Trystan of noble qualities,
they do not know thee ;
it is the family of Arthur which is ambushing thee."

Trystan :
" Because of Arthur I do not threaten ;"
nine hundred battalions I shall provoke;
unless I am slain, I shall slay."

Gwalchmai :
"Trystan, friend of women,
before entering upon the bloody work,
the best thing is peace."

Trystan :
"If I have my sword on my hip,
and my right hand to defend me,
am I worse off than they ?"

Gwalchmai:
"Trystan of shining qualities,
who breakest the [lance-]shaft with thy effort,
do not reject Arthur as a kinsman."

Trystan :
"Gwalchmai of pre-eminent qualities,
the shower has over-drenched a hundred hosts ;
as he may love me, I shall love him."

Gwalchmai :
"Trystan, whose habit is to be foremost,
The shower has over-drenched a hundred oaks ;
Come and converse with thy kinsman."

Trystan:
"Gwalchmai of crossgrained ( ?) qualities,
the shower over-drenches a hundred furrows ;
I will go wherever thou mayest wish."

Then Trystan went with Gwalchmai to Arthur, and Gwalchmai sang this englyn:


"Arthur of courteous habits,
the shower has over-drenched a hundred trees ;
here is Trystan, be joyful."

Then Arthur sang this englyn:


"Gwalchmai of faultless manners,
who wast not wont to conceal thyself on the day of battle ;
[I bid] welcome to Trystan my nephew."

Notwithstanding that, Trystan said nothing; and Arthur sang the second englyn :


"Blessed Trystan, army chieftain,
Love thy kindred as well as thyself,
and me as head of the tribe."

And notwithstanding that, Trystan said nothing: and Arthur sang the third englyn:


"Trystan, chief of battles,
Take as much as the best,
and love me sincerely."

In spite of that, Trystan said nothing; and Arthur sang the fourth englyn:


"Trystan of exceedingly prudent manners,
love thy kindred, it will not bring thee loss ;
coldness grows not between one kinsman and another."

Then answered Trystan and sang this englyn to Arthur, his uncle:


"Arthur, I will consider of what thou sayest,
and thee first will I adorn [with praise ;]
whatever thou mayest wish, I will do."
And then peace was made by Arthur between Trystan and March y Meirchion, and Arthur conversed with the two of them in turn, and neither of them was willing to be without Esyllt. Then Arthur adjudged her to one while the leaves should be on the wood, and to the other during the time that the leaves should not be on the wood, the husband to have the choice. And the latter chose the time when the leaves should not be on the wood, because the night is longest during that season. And Arthur announced that to Esyllt, and she said, "Blessed be the judgment and he who gave it !" And Esyllt sang this englyn:


"Three trees are good in nature :
the holly, the ivy, and the yew,
which keep their leaves throughout their lives :
I am Trystan's as long as he lives !"

And in this way March y Meirchion lost his wife forever. And so ends the story.